# Questions for meeting:

* Do we want camelCase or underscores for object/function names?

# To dos for meeting:

* Work on generating yacc-able subsets of grammar, and build full grammar
* Determine what's left to be done for LRM
* Determine what's left to be done for language tutorial
* Figure out timeline for next two days
* Discuss potential meeting with Aho
* Discuss potential meeting with SIMPL team 

# Obligations for next time:

## Sam

## Jason

## Kurry

## Paul

## Ben
